<!--hacking-->
# THC Hydra

In the shadow of my previous write up about my Metasploitable 2 hacking I want to make a quick point about brute forcing.
For all the online brute force attacks I launch, I use THC Hydra. There are other tools out there but I don't prefer brute
forcing as an attack vector so I have not invested time in learning much about them.

Hydra is awesome and works really well. When used correctly a brute force attack can be very fruit full as we saw 
in [part two](http://filimon-danopoulos.github.io/posts/2014-11-15_Metasploitable-2-part-two.html).
In fact both the FTP hack and the recent telnet "hack" could have been replaced by a brute force attack. 
So what's the catch? Quite a few actually:

1. In order to be effective a brute force attack requires a user name or a short list of user names. The attack takes exponentially
longer if this information is not known. You can skip brute force as an viable strategy if you can't get your hand of this information.
2. It's noisy. In order to be effective you will generate a lot of traffic. This is easily intercepted and you can get compromised. 
3. You will leave traces in logs, a lot of them can be cleaned up you are root, but if you can't get root then you are out of luck.
4. You will have to wait, a brute force attack by definition a slow process.
5. It's easy to mitigate, a simple delay of 2 seconds for a failed authentication attempt makes all but the simplest attacks pointless.

In some scenarios brute forcing can be very effective, for example if you manage to find out things like:

* User name, a known user name makes all the difference.
* Password policy, if you know that the password has to be two numbers a symbol and any number of letters, in any order. Most people will use
a password that matches the following regular expression /^[0-9]{0-2}.?\w.*?$/, even if the number might as well have been last.
* If you happen know the network well enough that getting caught by and IDS or other logging system is not an issue.
* The targeted service does not protect it self from brute force attacks.

Then a brute force attack might be in order, otherwise? Stick to attacks that exploit flaws in software rather than people!



