<!---programming, web, work-->
# KISS

I know I said that I would do a hacking write up for my next post but I wanted to write this first, next post will be about hacking, *I promise*.  

[Keep it simple, stupid](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/KISS_principle) is my favorite design principle as it is universally 
applicable, and is one of the few things I learned during programming that applies to the world outside of software development. 

At work, I recently had a scenario where a more KISS-oriented approached would have saved us a couple of hours. Since it is work related
I won't give any specific examples, I don't want to get in trouble. In order to get the gist of the issue some information is required, 
we are an ASP.NET MVC5 shop and run a web application that is consists of several SPAs wired together by MVC views. 

## The issue

When a single user opens the application in two browser tabs and attempts to use different credentials in the two tabs they get the unintended
consequence (from the users perspective) that both tabs use the same ASP.NET session. When they open the second tab they are already authenticated 
(same session remember) and they have to log out and log in with the new credentials. Now since the two applications share cookies and by 
extension session the first tab runs under the same user as the second one, all user-specific things like locale, 
data source etc. are thus perceived as wrong. This is by design and most of the web works this way, but the application we are 
building is replacing a desktop client and there the users can have multiple instances open. 

## The solution, fairly simple

We had to come up with a solution for this perceived problem. After arguing the merits and pitfalls of different solutions 
everybody eventually agreed that a SignalR solution fits this problem perfectly. We assembled a small team that was tasked with building this POC 
as quick as possible.

So we started brainstorming around what would be required to create this simple proof of concept. The idea was to broadcast the fact that a new session 
has been opened to all old clients of a particular user, then the client could act accordingly. In theory a simple solution, so we did some 
sketching and it looked good. We know started looking at what could go wrong. This is where we hit our first roadblock, load balancing.
  
In order to get this working behind a load balancer we would have to save the state of each connection to a database so that all servers can share the same
state. This added complexity to the solution, this is turn affects maintainability and no one on the team likes that. 

## The solution, simpler yet

SignalR would not work without a significant amount of change to the infrastructure so in order to get the proof of concept going quickly, 
we decided to implement the same solution with polling instead. That way we could later migrate the server to the above SignalR solution since the client 
would have react the same way in both cases. The server already has all the infrastructure to handle regular HTTP request behind a load balancer 
so this would require no significant modification to the server code. 

The client was meant to cache the user name it received when loading the page. It would then poll the server for the currently logged in user's user 
name every 30 seconds, then compare it to the cached user name and act accordingly when the differ. Since the session changes when the user 
authenticates in the second tab, the result from the poll would not be the same as the cached user name.

## The solution, dead simple

Simple solutions are not always easy to spot. This was true in this case too, before a single row of server side code was
written a solution was found that was near real time and required no AJAX calls. Can you spot it?

The solution was actually part of the problem. Since all tabs share the same cookies we can use this to craft our solution. When a user logs in, a user name
cookie is set. So when the users logs out and logs in again in the second tab the user name cookie is changed in the first tab as well. This means that we can cache 
the user name upon log in and regularly check that the value is the same as the one presently in the cookie. If the value changes the client reacts and locks 
the application. This lock can only be broken by entering the password for the user, this in turn triggers authentication and resets the user name cookie, 
the second tab reacts to the user name cookie change and is locked. 

Since this solution only consists of a cookie look up we can do it every second without a significant performance hit, so we get near real time updates! I thought 
that the final solution was really neat and simple. KISS at it's best!
